blogpost about a reliable and scalable prometheus (#240)
coveo/source.coveo.com: _posts/2021-11-11-prometheus-at-scale.md

---

layout: post

title: "Prometheus at scale"

tags: [Prometheus, Thanos, high-availability, scaling, Coveo, Kubernetes]

author:
  name: Samuel Bégin
  bio: Cloud infrastructure team
  image: 2021-11-11-prometheus-at-scale/samuelbegin.jpg

---

As the company continually grows year after year, by bringing in new clients, deploying in new regions, integrating new technologies, so must our infrastructure on which it sits. This explosion in data and event volumes demands that companies find scalable solutions to match their ambitions. It's a bit more complicated than simply throwing buzzwords like incantations, so I'll help you dive a bit into this world.

<!-- more -->

![asd]({{ site.baseurl }}/images/2021-11-11-prometheus-at-scale/dilbert-kubernetes.jpeg)

> Most companies working with cloud-native, distributed and scalable technologies will aim at scaling on demand, or rather _scale with your wallet_, so that for example no human actions are required in preparation for black Friday. But unfortunately, it's not as easy as it sounds. Whether you're moving from three to ten virtual machines, from a dozen micro-services to a hundred, or you're preparing your ~100 nodes Kubernetes cluster to hit 300 in the next year, scaling up will inevitably lead to unforeseen problems. One of them is ensuring monitoring and alerting stays reliable for an ever-increasing number of virtual machines, micro-services and other components.

Author: invoking stylistic choice to not incluse oxford commas :joy:

The single most important factor in memory consumption is the cardinality of time series. This represents the sum of unique characteristics a metric can have. To keep track of the high cardinality metrics and labels, go to the prometheus interface, under `/status`. There is a handy overview of the highest cardinality metrics, and a bit more...

```shell
Name                                        Count
apiserver_request_duration_seconds_bucket   38836
container_tasks_state                       16790
container_memory_failures_total             13432
```

You can read more on how we optimize our memory consumption in [this blog post]({{ site.baseurl }}/2021/03/03/prometheus-memory/).

Sadly, vertical scaling is not good enough, because it requires manual interventions, dedicated virtual machines, and the boot time is just gonna get worse. We must find another way to scale.

## Horizontal Scaling

If we can't have bigger instances, let's have more of them!

> To scale horizontally, we must split the scrape targets in groups. It's called **sharding** the scrape metrics. This will split prometheus into multiple smaller instances, which we can host on different nodes, thus easily scaling by increasing the amount of nodes in the cluster when required.

Author: TIL
> Although number and amount have similar meanings, number is used for things that can be counted, while amount is used for things that cannot be counted. Knowing when to use each one is a matter of looking at the noun being described

> We can do that logically, by dividing the targets by services, such as RabbitMQ, Elasticsearch, Kubernetes, etc. Or we could have one Prometheus shard per Kubernetes namespace. But I think the best approach is to use a pseudo-random division of all our scrape targets, so that it can be managed as one big Prometheus stack and also scaled on demand, without human interactions.

Reviewer: and also scale on demand (not past tense)

And there we have a solid solution for scaling on demand. We can further divide the pool of monitoring targets into more prometheus shards, splitting the resource demand on multiple instances.

## Putting it all together

In order to have both high availability and scaling potential, the setup must look like the following schema. Both shards now have each their own replica pairs, and the Thanos Querier makes sense of all that using a bit of configuration.

![prometheus-final]({{ site.baseurl }}/images/2021-11-11-prometheus-at-scale/prometheus-final.png)

```shell
> kubectl get pods -n monitoring
NAME                    READY   STATUS
prometheus-0-shard-0    3/3     Running
prometheus-0-shard-1    3/3     Running
prometheus-1-shard-0    3/3     Running
prometheus-1-shard-1    3/3     Running
```

With that tested and deployed, we can now scale horizontally at will, adding more shards as we go.

## Querying multiple clusters

> In our setup, this monitoring software stack is in place in each kubernetes cluster, which we have a dozen of. This results in a lot of places to look at when you want to visualize the same metric over multiple clusters.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In our setup, this monitoring software stack is in place in each Kubernetes cluster, which we have a dozen of. This results in a lot of places to look at when you want to visualize the same metric over multiple clusters.
```

Now I hear you ask, _but is there a place I can see all of that at the same time?_

> Well yes! To do that, we have a special cluster in a dedicated environment (lets call it observability) which will be able to talk to all other clusters. Since the Thanos Query component can also use other Queriers as data sources, we can use them to bridge our different clusters in order for Grafana to have a unified view of everything!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Well yes! To do that, we have a special cluster in a dedicated environment (let’s call it observability) which will be able to talk to all other clusters. Since the Thanos Query component can also use other Queriers as data sources, we can use them to bridge our different clusters in order for Grafana to have a unified view of everything!
```
